Profiling Docs overhaul update (#7803)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiling/search_profiles.md

---
title: Search Profiles
kind: Documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/search_profiles.gif" alt="Search profiles by tags">}}

> Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. By default profiles are uploaded once a minute. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. By default, profiles are uploaded once a minute. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.
```

| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each method, including allocations which were subsequently freed.                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Wall Time in Native Code | Shows the elapsed time spent in native code. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. This profile does not include time spent running JVM bytecode, which is typically most of your application code. |
| Class load               | Shows the number of classes loaded by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Exception Profile                    | Shows the number of errors and exception thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Exception Profile                    | Shows the number of errors and exceptions thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

| Profile type             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CPU         | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU, including Python and native code.                                                                                                                         |

> | Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Only supported on Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed - only supported with Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
```

| CPU                      | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU.                                                                          |
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function since the start of the application, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Go calls this `alloc_space`. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.              |
| Allocation Count         | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function since the start of the application, including allocations which were subsequently freed. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.     |
| Heap                     | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function that remained allocated since the start of the application and lived since the last garbage collection. Go calls this `inuse_space`. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.               |

> | Heap Count               | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function and that remained allocated since the start of the application and lived since the last garbage collection. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Heap Count               | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function, and which objects remained allocated since the start of the application and lived since the last garbage collection. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.                              |
```

      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/search_profiles.gif" alt="Search profiles by tags">}}

Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. By default profiles are uploaded once a minute. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.

You can filter according to infrastructure tags or application tags set up from your [environment tracing configuration][1]. By default the following facets are available:

| Facet    | Definition                                                                                             |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Env      | The environment your application is running on (`prod`, `staging`).                                    |
| Service  | The name of the [service][2] your code is running.                                                     |
| Version  | The version of your code.                                                                              |

> | Host     | The host name your profiled process is running on. If running in Kubernetes, it's the name of the pod. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Host     | The host name your profiled process is running on. |
```

Now that we go through the agent by default it'll be the actual host.

| Runtime  | The type of runtime the profiled process is running (`JVM`, `CPython`).                                |
| Language | The language of your code (`Java`, `Python`).                                                          |

The following measures are available:

| Measure           | Definition                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | CPU cores              | CPU load summed on all cores of the process. This metric can go above `100%`, and the theoretical limit is `nCores` \* `100%`.                                                    |

Reviewer 2: Cores does not use %, it's a float value with no unit (or `cores` unit).

Author: updated

| Memory Allocation | Memory allocation rate in `Bytes/s` over the course of the profile. This value can be above the maximum amount of RAM memory because it can be garbage collected during the profile. |

## Profiles

Click on a line to view a specific profile:

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profiling_flamegraph.gif" alt="A specic profile">}}

The profile header contains information associated with your profile, like the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it.

Four tabs are below the profile header:

| Tab          | Definition                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Profiles     | Flame graph and summary table of the profile you are looking at. You can switch between multiple profile types (`CPU`, `Memory allocation`) |

> | Analysis     | A set of heuristics that suggest potential issues or areas of improvement in your code                                                      |

Reviewer 2: Might want a caveat here explaining this only works with Java.

| Metrics      | Profiling metrics coming from all profiles of the same service                                                                              |
| Runtime Info | Text dump of all the runtime properties                                                                                                     |

**Note**: In the upper right corner of each profile, there are options to:

- Download the profile
- Switch the profile to full screen

### Profile types

In the **Profiles** tab you can see all profile types available for a given language. Depending on the language, the information collected about your profile differs.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specific profile">}}

> Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

Reviewer 2: Lets add a comment to keep these in sync with the app-level tooltips/descriptions located in https://github.com/DataDog/web-ui/blob/prod/javascript/datadog/profiling/lib/profile-types-definitions.ts

| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each method, including allocations which were subsequently freed.                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Wall Time in Native Code | Shows the elapsed time spent in native code. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. This profile does not include time spent running JVM bytecode, which is typically most of your application code. |
| Class load               | Shows the number of classes loaded by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Error                    | Shows the number of errors thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: With the new exception sampling changes, this should likely be renamed to Throwables or something like that.

Author: What should we put instead? `Exceptions Thrown`?

Reviewer 3: It should probably be singular to match the other types. They're like that as a ~shorthand of "X Profile", eg "Allocation Profile".

`Exception` isn't technically precise but miiight be useful because of it's user-friendliness. Alex's suggestion of `Throwable` is the more accurate version.

In either case we should say in the description that it includes Exceptions and Errors.

| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Only supported on Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Wall | Shows the elapsed time used by each function. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the function is running. |
| Exceptions               | Shows the number of caught or uncaught exceptions raised by each function.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Lock                     | Shows the time each function spent waiting for a lock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: A lot of these descriptions focus only on the default summary table function. But we can actually show more stuff. For example, with the merging of the 4 python locks, the updated description is:

> Shows the time each function spent in locking (waiting for or holding a lock) or the number of times a function was observed locking/unlocking a lock.

https://github.com/DataDog/web-ui/blob/c02849b22d57ec26ed7f562573ba12c822ece1cc/javascript/datadog/profiling/lib/profile-types-definitions.ts#L334-L335

| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CPU                      | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU.                                                                          |
| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Go calls this `alloc_space`. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.              |
| Allocation Count         | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.     |
| Heap                     | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function that remained allocated. Go calls this `inuse_space`. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.               |

> | Heap Count               | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function and that remained allocated. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.                              |

Reviewer 2: Probably worth clarification on the allocation and heap types about the fact that they represent aggregates since program start and last GC, respectively.

---
title: Search Profiles
kind: Documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/profiling/trace_profile'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Connect traces and profiles.'
    - link: 'tracing/profiling/code_level_metrics'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'View code level metrics.'  
    - link: 'tracing/profiling/getting_started'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Enable continuous profiling for your application.'
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tags: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog.'
---

> {{< img src="tracing/profiling/search_profiles.gif" alt="Search profiles by tags">}}

Reviewer 3: Might be worth not using current time so the cpu and alloc metrics in each row aren't missing, until we fix that :-)

Each row is a profile of a process for a short amount of time. By default profiles are uploaded once a minute. Depending on the language, these processes are profiled between 15s and 60s.

You can filter according to infrastructure tags or application tags set up from your [environment tracing configuration][1]. By default the following facets are available:

| Facet    | Definition                                                                                             |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | Env      | The environment your application is running on (`prod`, `staging`).                                    |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Env      | The environment your application is running on (`production`, `staging`).                                    |
```
To be consistent with examples above.

| Service  | The name of the [service][2] your code is running.                                                     |
| Version  | The version of your code.                                                                              |
| Host     | The host name your profiled process is running on. |
| Runtime  | The type of runtime the profiled process is running (`JVM`, `CPython`).                                |

> | Language | The language of your code (`Java`, `Python`).                                                          |

Reviewer 3: +1 on this ordering. Might want to ditch language since it's probably going away.

The following measures are available:

| Measure           | Definition                                                                                                                                                                           |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | CPU cores              | CPU load summed on all cores of the process. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| CPU              | CPU usage, measured in cores. |
```

Although maybe we should update the product first :-)

> | Memory Allocation | Memory allocation rate in `Bytes/s` over the course of the profile. This value can be above the maximum amount of RAM memory because it can be garbage collected during the profile. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Memory Allocation | Memory allocation rate over the course of the profile. This value can be above the amount of memory on your system because allocated memory can be garbage collected during the profile. |
```

Reviewer 3: Most important part is that it's not bytes/s. If we get a fixed video, it'll be self-explanatory.

## Profiles

Click on a line to view a specific profile:

> {{< img src="tracing/profiling/profiling_flamegraph.gif" alt="A specic profile">}}

Reviewer 3: Maybe show one with the analysis highlighting a problem?

Author: added to next update todo!

> The profile header contains information associated with your profile, like the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The header contains information associated with your profile, like the service that generated it, or the environment and code version associated to it.
```

Reviewer 3: It's a little odd to describe info about this panel that's not visible in the video.

Four tabs are below the profile header:

| Tab          | Definition                                                                                                                                  |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Profiles     | Flame graph and summary table of the profile you are looking at. You can switch between multiple profile types (`CPU`, `Memory allocation`) |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Profiles     | A flame graph and summary table of the profile you are looking at. You can switch between profile types (`CPU`, `Memory allocation`). |
```

> | Analysis     | A set of heuristics that suggest potential issues or areas of improvement in your code. Currently only available for Java                   |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Analysis     | A set of heuristics that suggest potential issues or areas of improvement in your code. Currently only available for Java.                   |
```

> | Metrics      | Profiling metrics coming from all profiles of the same service                                                                              |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Metrics      | Profiling metrics coming from all profiles of the same service.                                                                              |
```

> | Runtime Info | Text dump of all the runtime properties                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Runtime Info | Runtime properties in supported languages, and profile tags.                                                                                                     |
```

**Note**: In the upper right corner of each profile, there are options to:

- Download the profile
- Switch the profile to full screen

### Profile types

In the **Profiles** tab you can see all profile types available for a given language. Depending on the language, the information collected about your profile differs.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/profile.png" alt="A specific profile">}}

Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

| Profile type             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | CPU in Java Code         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes JVM bytecode, but not native code called from within the JVM.                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| CPU in Java Code         | Shows the time each method spent running on the CPU. It includes your code that runs in the JVM (Java, Kotlin, etc), but not JVM operations or native code called from within the JVM.                                                                                                                                                                     |
```

| Wall Time in Native Code | Shows the elapsed time spent in native code. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the method is running. This profile does not include time spent running JVM bytecode, which is typically most of your application code. |
| Class load               | Shows the number of classes loaded by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Error                    | Shows the number of errors thrown by each method.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

> | File I/O                 | Shows the time each method spent reading and writing to files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| File I/O                 | Shows the time each method spent reading from and writing to files.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
```

> | Lock                     | Shows the time each function spent waiting for a lock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Lock                     | Shows the time each method spent waiting for a lock.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
```

> | Socket I/O               | Shows the time each method spent handling socket I/O.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 3: The description should probably mirror File I/O.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Python" %}}

Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

| Profile type             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | CPU         | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU. It includes CPython bytecode, including native code called from within Python.                                                                                                                                                                     |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| CPU         | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU, including Python and native code.                                                                                                                         |
```

| Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Only supported on Python 3.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Allocation Count         | Shows the number of heap allocations made by each function, including allocations which were subsequently freed.     |
| Wall Time | Shows the elapsed time used by each function. Elapsed time includes time when code is running on CPU, waiting for I/O, and anything else that happens while the function is running. |
| Exceptions               | Shows the number of caught or uncaught exceptions raised by each function.                                                                                           |
| Lock                     | Shows the time each function spent in locking (waiting for or holding a lock) or the number of times a function was observed locking/unlocking a lock. |
| Uncaught Exceptions      | Shows the exceptions that were not caught by any try/except block. |

> | Exceptions              | Shows the exceptions that were raised during program execution. |

Reviewer 3: Dupe :-)

Author: I think they are two different types, no?

Reviewer 3: Exceptions is listed twice.

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Go" %}}

Once enabled, the following profile types are collected:

| Profile type             | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| CPU                      | Shows the time each function spent running on the CPU.                                                                          |

> | Allocation               | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function since the start of the application, including allocations which were subsequently freed. Go calls this `alloc_space`. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.              |

Reviewer 3: Ooh we should add the bit about GC to alloc for other languages (here and in-app).

Author: Added to my todo for next update!

| Allocation Count         | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function since the start of the application, including allocations which were subsequently freed. This is useful for investigating garbage collection load.     |
| Heap                     | Shows the amount of heap memory allocated by each function that remained allocated since the start of the application and lived since the last garbage collection. Go calls this `inuse_space`. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.               |
| Heap Count               | Shows the number of objects allocated in heap memory by each function and that remained allocated since the start of the application and lived since the last garbage collection. This is useful for investigating the overall memory usage of your service.                              |

{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "Node" %}}

Reviewer 3: Ohai!

Author: err, this should be removed since node will be added monday :)
